APT-GET(8)                                          APT                                         APT-GET(8)

NAME
       apt-get - утилита управления APT -- интерфейс командной строки

SYNOPSIS
       apt-get [-asqdyfmubV] [-o=config_string] [-c=config_file] [-t=target_release] [-a=architecture]
               { update 
               | upgrade 
               | dselect-upgrade 
               | dist-upgrade 
               | install pkg [{=pkg_version_number | /target_release}]...  
               | remove pkg...  
               | purge pkg...
               | source pkg [{=pkg_version_number | /target_release}]...  
               | build-dep pkg [{=pkg_version_number | /target_release}]...  
               | download pkg [{=pkg_version_number | /target_release}]...  
               | check 
               | clean 
               | autoclean 
               | autoremove 
               | {-v | --version} 
               | {-h | --help}
               }

DESCRIPTION
       apt-get  инструмент командной строки для управления пакетами и может рассматриваться 
       как пользовательский "back-end" средствам, использующим библиотеку APT. 
       Существуют "front-end" интерфейсы, такие как aptitude(8), synaptic(8) and wajig(1).

       Если не задана опция -h, или --help, должна присутстсвовать одна из следующих команд.

       update
           update используется для повторной синхронизации файлов списков пакетов с их источниками.
           Списки доступных пакетов будут получены из источников, указанных в /etc/apt/sources.list.
           Например, при использовании архива Debian, эта команда разыскивает и просматривает файлы Packages.gz, 
           таким образом становится доступной информация о новых и обновлённых пакетах.
           Перед upgrade и dist-upgrade всегда должно выполняться update.
           Пожалуйста помните, что индикатор прогресса показывает не точную информацию, 
           поскольку размер файлов пакетов заранее не известен.

       upgrade
           upgrade используется для установки новейших версий всех установленных пакетов системы 
           из источников, указанных в /etc/apt/sources.list. 
           Будут разысканы новейшие версии установленных в настоящий момент пакетов и произведено обновление;
           ни в коем случае не будет удалено ни одного установленного пакета 
           или установлено нового пакета, не имеющего уже установленной в системе предыдущей версии. 
           Текущие версии установленных в настоящий момент пакетов, 
           если они не могут быть обновлены новыми версиями без изменения статуса других пакетов, 
           будут оставлены в неизменном виде. 
           Для того, чтобы apt-get узнал о существовании доступных новых версий пакетов, 
           данной команде должна предшествовать команда update.

       dist-upgrade
           dist-upgrade, в дополнение выполняет функцию upgrade, а также разумно управляет изменением зависимостей 
           с новыми версиями пакетов; apt-get имеет "умную" систему разрешения конфликтов 
           и она будет в случае необходимости пытаться произвести обновление наиболее важных пакетов 
           за счет менее важных. Команда dist-upgrade тем не менее может удалять некоторые пакеты. 
           Файл /etc/apt/sources.list содержит список источников для получения пакетов, 
           из которых будут получены файлы пакетов. 
           См. также apt_preferences(5) для механизма переопределения основных настроек для отдельных пакетов.

       dselect-upgrade
           dselect-upgrade используется совместно с традиционным инструментом управления пакетов Debian,
           dselect(1).  dselect-upgrade следует изменениям, 
           которые делает dselect с полем Status доступных пакетов и выполняет действие, 
           необходимое для реализации этого состояния (например, удаление старых и установка новых пакетов). 

       install
           install устанавливает один или более пакетов отмеченных к установке или обновлению. 
           Каждый пакет - это имя пакета, а не полное имя файла, содержащего этот пакет 
           (например, в системе Debian, в качестве пакета может быть указано имя apt-utils, 
           но не apt-utils_1.2.12_amd64.deb). 
           Все пакеты, требуемые заданным пакетом (пакетами) отмеченными к установке, 
           также будут получены и установлены.
           Файл /etc/apt/sources.list используется для определения местонахождения нужных пакетов.
           Если к имени пакета добавляется символ переноса (без разделяющего пробела), 
           то заданный пакет будет удален, если он установлен.
           Аналогично знак плюс может использоваться для отметки пакета к установке.
           Эта особенность может быть использована для перекрытия решения, 
           сделанного системой разрешения конфликтов apt-get.

           Определенная версия пакета может быть выбрана для установки 
           при помощи следующего за именем равно и версии требуемого павкета. 
           В результате версия будет обнаружена и отмечена к установке. 
           Alternatively a specific distribution can be selected by
           following the package name with a slash and the version of the distribution or the Archive name
           (stable, testing, unstable).

           Both of the version selection mechanisms can downgrade packages and must be used with care.

           This is also the target to use if you want to upgrade one or more already-installed packages
           without upgrading every package you have on your system. Unlike the "upgrade" target, which
           installs the newest version of all currently installed packages, "install" will install the
           newest version of only the package(s) specified. Simply provide the name of the package(s) you
           wish to upgrade, and if a newer version is available, it (and its dependencies, as described
           above) will be downloaded and installed.

           Finally, the apt_preferences(5) mechanism allows you to create an alternative installation
           policy for individual packages.

           Если нет пакетов, совпадающих с заданным выражением и выражение содержит один из символов '.', '?' или '*', 
           то оно рассматривается как шаблон для регулярных выражений POSIX 
           и уже этот шаблон применяется ко всем именам пакетов в базе данных. 
           Любые совпадающие с шаблоном пакеты будут затем установлены (или удалены).
           Заметим, что к примеру, подстрока 'lo*' совпадает с 'how-lo' и 'lowest'. 
           Если это нежелательно, используйте якоря '^' и '$' или создавайте более сложное выражение.

       remove
           remove is identical to install except that packages are removed instead of installed. Note that
           removing a package leaves its configuration files on the system. If a plus sign is appended to
           the package name (with no intervening space), the identified package will be installed instead
           of removed.

       purge
           purge is identical to remove except that packages are removed and purged (any configuration
           files are deleted too).

       source
           source causes apt-get to fetch source packages. APT will examine the available packages to
           decide which source package to fetch. It will then find and download into the current directory
           the newest available version of that source package while respecting the default release, set
           with the option APT::Default-Release, the -t option or per package with the pkg/release syntax,
           if possible.

           Source packages are tracked separately from binary packages via deb-src lines in the
           sources.list(5) file. This means that you will need to add such a line for each repository you
           want to get sources from; otherwise you will probably get either the wrong (too old/too new)
           source versions or none at all.

           If the --compile option is specified then the package will be compiled to a binary .deb using
           dpkg-buildpackage for the architecture as defined by the --host-architecture option. If
           --download-only is specified then the source package will not be unpacked.

           A specific source version can be retrieved by postfixing the source name with an equals and
           then the version to fetch, similar to the mechanism used for the package files. This enables
           exact matching of the source package name and version, implicitly enabling the
           APT::Get::Only-Source option.

           Note that source packages are not installed and tracked in the dpkg database like binary
           packages; they are simply downloaded to the current directory, like source tarballs.

       build-dep
           build-dep causes apt-get to install/remove packages in an attempt to satisfy the build
           dependencies for a source package. By default the dependencies are satisfied to build the
           package natively. If desired a host-architecture can be specified with the --host-architecture
           option instead.

       check
           check is a diagnostic tool; it updates the package cache and checks for broken dependencies.

       download
           download will download the given binary package into the current directory.

       clean
           clean clears out the local repository of retrieved package files. It removes everything but the
           lock file from /var/cache/apt/archives/ and /var/cache/apt/archives/partial/.

       autoclean (and the auto-clean alias since 1.1)
           Like clean, autoclean clears out the local repository of retrieved package files. The
           difference is that it only removes package files that can no longer be downloaded, and are
           largely useless. This allows a cache to be maintained over a long period without it growing out
           of control. The configuration option APT::Clean-Installed will prevent installed packages from
           being erased if it is set to off.

       autoremove (and the auto-remove alias since 1.1)
           autoremove is used to remove packages that were automatically installed to satisfy dependencies
           for other packages and are now no longer needed.

       changelog
           changelog tries to download the changelog of a package and displays it through sensible-pager.
           By default it displays the changelog for the version that is installed. However, you can
           specify the same options as for the install command.

       indextargets
           Displays by default a deb822 formatted listing of information about all data files (aka index
           targets) apt-get update would download. Supports a --format option to modify the output format
           as well as accepts lines of the default output to filter the records by. The command is mainly
           used as an interface for external tools working with APT to get information as well as
           filenames for downloaded files so they can use them as well instead of downloading them again
           on their own. Detailed documentation is omitted here and can instead be found in the source
           tree in doc/acquire-additional-files.txt.

OPTIONS
       All command line options may be set using the configuration file, the descriptions indicate the
       configuration option to set. For boolean options you can override the config file by using
       something like -f-,--no-f, -f=no or several other variations.

       --no-install-recommends
           Do not consider recommended packages as a dependency for installing. Configuration Item:
           APT::Install-Recommends.

       --install-suggests
           Consider suggested packages as a dependency for installing. Configuration Item:
           APT::Install-Suggests.

       -d, --download-only
           Download only; package files are only retrieved, not unpacked or installed. Configuration Item:
           APT::Get::Download-Only.

       -f, --fix-broken
           Fix; attempt to correct a system with broken dependencies in place. This option, when used with
           install/remove, can omit any packages to permit APT to deduce a likely solution. If packages
           are specified, these have to completely correct the problem. The option is sometimes necessary
           when running APT for the first time; APT itself does not allow broken package dependencies to
           exist on a system. It is possible that a system's dependency structure can be so corrupt as to
           require manual intervention (which usually means using dpkg --remove to eliminate some of the
           offending packages). Use of this option together with -m may produce an error in some
           situations. Configuration Item: APT::Get::Fix-Broken.

       -m, --ignore-missing, --fix-missing
           Ignore missing packages; if packages cannot be retrieved or fail the integrity check after
           retrieval (corrupted package files), hold back those packages and handle the result. Use of
           this option together with -f may produce an error in some situations. If a package is selected
           for installation (particularly if it is mentioned on the command line) and it could not be
           downloaded then it will be silently held back. Configuration Item: APT::Get::Fix-Missing.

       --no-download
           Disables downloading of packages. This is best used with --ignore-missing to force APT to use
           only the .debs it has already downloaded. Configuration Item: APT::Get::Download.

       -q, --quiet
           Quiet; produces output suitable for logging, omitting progress indicators. More q's will
           produce more quiet up to a maximum of 2. You can also use -q=# to set the quiet level,
           overriding the configuration file. Note that quiet level 2 implies -y; you should never use -qq
           without a no-action modifier such as -d, --print-uris or -s as APT may decide to do something
           you did not expect. Configuration Item: quiet.

       -s, --simulate, --just-print, --dry-run, --recon, --no-act
           No action; perform a simulation of events that would occur based on the current system state
           but do not actually change the system. Locking will be disabled (Debug::NoLocking) so the
           system state could change while apt-get is running. Simulations can also be executed by
           non-root users which might not have read access to all apt configuration distorting the
           simulation. A notice expressing this warning is also shown by default for non-root users
           (APT::Get::Show-User-Simulation-Note). Configuration Item: APT::Get::Simulate.

           Simulated runs print out a series of lines, each representing a dpkg operation: configure
           (Conf), remove (Remv) or unpack (Inst). Square brackets indicate broken packages, and empty
           square brackets indicate breaks that are of no consequence (rare).

       -y, --yes, --assume-yes
           Automatic yes to prompts; assume "yes" as answer to all prompts and run non-interactively. If
           an undesirable situation, such as changing a held package, trying to install a unauthenticated
           package or removing an essential package occurs then apt-get will abort. Configuration Item:
           APT::Get::Assume-Yes.

       --assume-no
           Automatic "no" to all prompts. Configuration Item: APT::Get::Assume-No.

       -u, --show-upgraded
           Show upgraded packages; print out a list of all packages that are to be upgraded. Configuration
           Item: APT::Get::Show-Upgraded.

       -V, --verbose-versions
           Show full versions for upgraded and installed packages. Configuration Item:
           APT::Get::Show-Versions.

       -a, --host-architecture
           This option controls the architecture packages are built for by apt-get source --compile and
           how cross-builddependencies are satisfied. By default is it not set which means that the host
           architecture is the same as the build architecture (which is defined by APT::Architecture).
           Configuration Item: APT::Get::Host-Architecture.

       -P, --build-profiles
           This option controls the activated build profiles for which a source package is built by
           apt-get source --compile and how build dependencies are satisfied. By default no build profile
           is active. More than one build profile can be activated at a time by concatenating them with a
           comma. Configuration Item: APT::Build-Profiles.

       -b, --compile, --build
           Compile source packages after downloading them. Configuration Item: APT::Get::Compile.

       --ignore-hold
           Ignore package holds; this causes apt-get to ignore a hold placed on a package. This may be
           useful in conjunction with dist-upgrade to override a large number of undesired holds.
           Configuration Item: APT::Ignore-Hold.

       --with-new-pkgs
           Allow installing new packages when used in conjunction with upgrade. This is useful if the
           update of a installed package requires new dependencies to be installed. Instead of holding the
           package back upgrade will upgrade the package and install the new dependencies. Note that
           upgrade with this option will never remove packages, only allow adding new ones. Configuration
           Item: APT::Get::Upgrade-Allow-New.

       --no-upgrade
           Do not upgrade packages; when used in conjunction with install, no-upgrade will prevent
           packages on the command line from being upgraded if they are already installed. Configuration
           Item: APT::Get::Upgrade.

       --only-upgrade
           Do not install new packages; when used in conjunction with install, only-upgrade will install
           upgrades for already installed packages only and ignore requests to install new packages.
           Configuration Item: APT::Get::Only-Upgrade.

       --allow-downgrades
           This is a dangerous option that will cause apt to continue without prompting if it is doing
           downgrades. It should not be used except in very special situations. Using it can potentially
           destroy your system! Configuration Item: APT::Get::allow-downgrades. Introduced in APT 1.1.

       --allow-remove-essential
           Force yes; this is a dangerous option that will cause apt to continue without prompting if it
           is removing essentials. It should not be used except in very special situations. Using it can
           potentially destroy your system! Configuration Item: APT::Get::allow-remove-essential.
           Introduced in APT 1.1.

       --allow-change-held-packages
           Force yes; this is a dangerous option that will cause apt to continue without prompting if it
           is changing held packages. It should not be used except in very special situations. Using it
           can potentially destroy your system! Configuration Item: APT::Get::allow-change-held-packages.
           Introduced in APT 1.1.

       --force-yes
           Force yes; this is a dangerous option that will cause apt to continue without prompting if it
           is doing something potentially harmful. It should not be used except in very special
           situations. Using force-yes can potentially destroy your system! Configuration Item:
           APT::Get::force-yes. This is deprecated and replaced by --allow-downgrades,
           --allow-remove-essential, --allow-change-held-packages in 1.1.

       --print-uris
           Instead of fetching the files to install their URIs are printed. Each URI will have the path,
           the destination file name, the size and the expected MD5 hash. Note that the file name to write
           to will not always match the file name on the remote site! This also works with the source and
           update commands. When used with the update command the MD5 and size are not included, and it is
           up to the user to decompress any compressed files. Configuration Item: APT::Get::Print-URIs.

       --purge
           Use purge instead of remove for anything that would be removed. An asterisk ("*") will be
           displayed next to packages which are scheduled to be purged.  remove --purge is equivalent to
           the purge command. Configuration Item: APT::Get::Purge.

       --reinstall
           Re-install packages that are already installed and at the newest version. Configuration Item:
           APT::Get::ReInstall.

       --list-cleanup
           This option is on by default; use --no-list-cleanup to turn it off. When it is on, apt-get will
           automatically manage the contents of /var/lib/apt/lists to ensure that obsolete files are
           erased. The only reason to turn it off is if you frequently change your sources list.
           Configuration Item: APT::Get::List-Cleanup.

       -t, --target-release, --default-release
           This option controls the default input to the policy engine; it creates a default pin at
           priority 990 using the specified release string. This overrides the general settings in
           /etc/apt/preferences. Specifically pinned packages are not affected by the value of this
           option. In short, this option lets you have simple control over which distribution packages
           will be retrieved from. Some common examples might be -t '2.1*', -t unstable or -t sid.
           Configuration Item: APT::Default-Release; see also the apt_preferences(5) manual page.

       --trivial-only
           Only perform operations that are 'trivial'. Logically this can be considered related to
           --assume-yes; where --assume-yes will answer yes to any prompt, --trivial-only will answer no.
           Configuration Item: APT::Get::Trivial-Only.

       --no-remove
           If any packages are to be removed apt-get immediately aborts without prompting. Configuration
           Item: APT::Get::Remove.

       --auto-remove
           If the command is either install or remove, then this option acts like running the autoremove
           command, removing unused dependency packages. Configuration Item: APT::Get::AutomaticRemove.

       --only-source
           Only has meaning for the source and build-dep commands. Indicates that the given source names
           are not to be mapped through the binary table. This means that if this option is specified,
           these commands will only accept source package names as arguments, rather than accepting binary
           package names and looking up the corresponding source package. Configuration Item:
           APT::Get::Only-Source.

       --diff-only, --dsc-only, --tar-only
           Download only the diff, dsc, or tar file of a source archive. Configuration Item:
           APT::Get::Diff-Only, APT::Get::Dsc-Only, and APT::Get::Tar-Only.

       --arch-only
           Only process architecture-dependent build-dependencies. Configuration Item:
           APT::Get::Arch-Only.

       --allow-unauthenticated
           Ignore if packages can't be authenticated and don't prompt about it. This can be useful while
           working with local repositories, but is a huge security risk if data authenticity isn't ensured
           in another way by the user itself. The usage of the Trusted option for sources.list(5) entries
           should usually be preferred over this global override. Configuration Item:
           APT::Get::AllowUnauthenticated.

       --no-allow-insecure-repositories
           Forbid the update command to acquire unverifiable data from configured sources. Apt will fail
           at the update command for repositories without valid cryptographically signatures.
           Configuration Item: Acquire::AllowInsecureRepositories.

       --show-progress
           Show user friendly progress information in the terminal window when packages are installed,
           upgraded or removed. For a machine parsable version of this data see README.progress-reporting
           in the apt doc directory. Configuration Item: Dpkg::Progress and Dpkg::Progress-Fancy.

       -h, --help
           Show a short usage summary.

       -v, --version
           Show the program version.

       -c, --config-file
           Configuration File; Specify a configuration file to use. The program will read the default
           configuration file and then this configuration file. If configuration settings need to be set
           before the default configuration files are parsed specify a file with the APT_CONFIG
           environment variable. See apt.conf(5) for syntax information.

       -o, --option
           Set a Configuration Option; This will set an arbitrary configuration option. The syntax is -o
           Foo::Bar=bar.  -o and --option can be used multiple times to set different options.

FILES
       /etc/apt/sources.list
           Locations to fetch packages from. Configuration Item: Dir::Etc::SourceList.

       /etc/apt/sources.list.d/
           File fragments for locations to fetch packages from. Configuration Item: Dir::Etc::SourceParts.

       /etc/apt/apt.conf
           APT configuration file. Configuration Item: Dir::Etc::Main.

       /etc/apt/apt.conf.d/
           APT configuration file fragments. Configuration Item: Dir::Etc::Parts.

       /etc/apt/preferences
           Version preferences file. This is where you would specify "pinning", i.e. a preference to get
           certain packages from a separate source or from a different version of a distribution.
           Configuration Item: Dir::Etc::Preferences.

       /etc/apt/preferences.d/
           File fragments for the version preferences. Configuration Item: Dir::Etc::PreferencesParts.

       /var/cache/apt/archives/
           Storage area for retrieved package files. Configuration Item: Dir::Cache::Archives.

       /var/cache/apt/archives/partial/
           Storage area for package files in transit. Configuration Item: Dir::Cache::Archives (partial
           will be implicitly appended)

       /var/lib/apt/lists/
           Storage area for state information for each package resource specified in sources.list(5)
           Configuration Item: Dir::State::Lists.

       /var/lib/apt/lists/partial/
           Storage area for state information in transit. Configuration Item: Dir::State::Lists (partial
           will be implicitly appended)

SEE ALSO
       apt-cache(8), apt-cdrom(8), dpkg(1), sources.list(5), apt.conf(5), apt-config(8), apt-secure(8),
       The APT User's guide in /usr/share/doc/apt-doc/, apt_preferences(5), the APT Howto.

DIAGNOSTICS
       apt-get returns zero on normal operation, decimal 100 on error.

BUGS
       APT bug page[1]. If you wish to report a bug in APT, please see
       /usr/share/doc/debian/bug-reporting.txt or the reportbug(1) command.

AUTHORS
       Jason Gunthorpe

       APT team

NOTES
        1. APT bug page
           http://bugs.debian.org/src:apt

APT 1.2.12                                    14 August 2015                                    APT-GET(8)
